kgo: document KongPluginInstallation (#8034)
Kong/docs.konghq.com: app/_src/gateway-operator/guides/plugin-distribution.md

                 "observedGeneration": 1,
                 "reason": "Ready",
                 "status": "True",
                 "type": "Accepted"
             }
         ],
         "underlyingConfigMapName": "custom-plugin-myheader-hnzf9"
     }
   ]
   ```

   in case of problems respective `conditions` or respective resources will provide more information.

   {:.note}
    > `KongPluginInstalaltion` resource creates a `ConfigMap` with the plugin content. Additional `ConfigMap`s are created when a plugin is referenced by other resources. The operator automatically manages the lifecycle of all these `ConfigMap`s.

4. Make the plugin available in a `Gateway` resource by referencing it in the `spec.pluginsToInstall` field of the `GatewayConfiguration` resource.
   Plugins can be referenced cross-namespace without any additional configuration.

   ```yaml
   echo '
   kind: GatewayConfiguration
   apiVersion: gateway-operator.konghq.com/v1beta1
   metadata:
     name: kong
     namespace: default
   spec:
     dataPlaneOptions:
       deployment:
         replicas: 2
         podTemplateSpec:
           spec:
             containers:
               - name: proxy

>                  image: kong/kong-gateway:{{ site.data.kong_latest_gateway.ce-version }}

Reviewer: My mistake on suggesting this variable here. `kong/kong-gateway` doesn't ship `MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH` tags.

```suggestion
                 image: kong/kong-gateway:{{ site.data.kong_latest_gateway.ee-version }}
```

---
title: Kong custom plugin distribution with KongPluginInstallation
---

{{ site.kgo_product_name }} can install Kong custom plugins packaged as container images. This guide shows how to package, install and use a custom plugin in {{site.base_gateway}} instances managed by the {{ site.kgo_product_name }}.

{% include md/kgo/prerequisites.md version=page.version release=page.release kongplugininstallation=true %}

{% include md/custom-plugin.md %}

2. Build a container image that includes the plugin code.

   It is expected to have plugin-related files at the root of the image. Thus for the plugin as mentioned earlier, the Dockerfile would look like this:

   ```bash
   echo 'FROM scratch

   COPY myheader /
   ' > Dockerfile
   ```

   where `myheader` is a directory that contains `handler.lua` and `schema.lua`.

   Build the image:

   ```bash
   docker build -t myheader:1.0.0 .
   ```

>    next push it to a registry available to the Kubernetes cluster where {{ site.kgo_product_name }} is running. A private registry can be used as well in the `KongPluginInstallation` resource.  Read more about it in CRD documentation.

Reviewer: Can we link to the reference documentation? ( I believe this doesn't exist yet that's why we're not linking )

                 "observedGeneration": 1,
                 "reason": "Ready",
                 "status": "True",
                 "type": "Accepted"
             }
         ],
         "underlyingConfigMapName": "custom-plugin-myheader-hnzf9"
     }
   ]
   ```

   in case of problems respective `conditions` or respective resources will provide more information.

   {:.note}
    > `KongPluginInstalaltion` resource creates a `ConfigMap` with the plugin content. Additional `ConfigMap`s are created when a plugin is referenced by other resources. The operator automatically manages the lifecycle of all these `ConfigMap`s.

4. Make the plugin available in a `Gateway` resource by referencing it in the `spec.pluginsToInstall` field of the `GatewayConfiguration` resource.
   Plugins can be referenced cross-namespace without any additional configuration.

   ```yaml
   echo '
   kind: GatewayConfiguration
   apiVersion: gateway-operator.konghq.com/v1beta1
   metadata:
     name: kong
     namespace: default
   spec:
     dataPlaneOptions:
       deployment:
         replicas: 2
         podTemplateSpec:
           spec:
             containers:
               - name: proxy

>                  image: kong/kong-gateway:3.8

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                 image: kong/kong-gateway:{{ site.data.kong_latest_gateway.ce-version }}
```

                 readinessProbe:
                   initialDelaySeconds: 1
                   periodSeconds: 1
       pluginsToInstall:
         - name: custom-plugin-myheader
     controlPlaneOptions:
       deployment:
         podTemplateSpec:
           spec:
             containers:
               - name: controller

>                  image: kong/kubernetes-ingress-controller:3.3.1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                 image: kong/kubernetes-ingress-controller:{{ site.data.kong_latest_KIC.version }}
```

---
title: Kong custom plugin distribution with KongPluginInstallation
---

> 
> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

{{ site.kgo_product_name }} can install Kong custom plugins packaged as container images. This guide shows how to package, install and use a custom plugin in {{site.base_gateway}} instances managed by the {{ site.kgo_product_name }}.

{% include md/kgo/prerequisites.md version=page.version release=page.release kongplugininstallation=true %}

{% include md/custom-plugin.md %}

2. Build a container image with the plugin code.

   It is expected to have plugin-related files at the root of the image. Thus for the aforementioned plugin, the Dockerfile would look like this:

   ```bash
   echo 'FROM scratch

   COPY myheader /
   ' > Dockerfile
   ```

   where `myheader` is a directory that contains `handler.lua` and `schema.lua`.

   Build the image:

   ```bash
   docker build -t myheader:1.0.0 .
   ```

   next push it to a registry that is available to the Kubernetes cluster where {{ site.kgo_product_name }} is running. How to use a private registry is

>    described in the CRD reference documentation.

Reviewer: Can we link to mentioned documentation?

   ```bash
   kubectl get kongplugininstallations.gateway-operator.konghq.com -o jsonpath-as-json='{.items[*].status}'
   ```

   The output should look like this:

   ```json
   [
     {
         "conditions": [
             {
                 "lastTransitionTime": "2024-10-09T19:39:39Z",
                 "message": "plugin successfully saved in cluster as ConfigMap",
                 "observedGeneration": 1,
                 "reason": "Ready",
                 "status": "True",
                 "type": "Accepted"
             }
         ],
         "underlyingConfigMapName": "custom-plugin-myheader-hnzf9"
     }
   ]
   ```

   in case of problems respective `conditions` or respective resources will provide more information.

   {:.note}
    > `KongPluginInstalaltion` resource creates a `ConfigMap` with the plugin content. Additional `ConfigMap`s are created when a plugin is referenced by other resources. The operator automatically manages the lifecycle of all these `ConfigMap`s.

4. Make the plugin available in a `Gateway` resource by referencing it in the `spec.pluginsToInstall` field of the `GatewayConfiguration` resource.

>    Plugins can be referenced cross-namespace without any additional configuration.

Author: I mean `GatewayConfiguration` configured in namespace `foo` can reference a `KongPluginInstallation` configured in namespace `bar`

>    Plugins can be referenced cross-namespace without any additional configuration.

Author: What about this @lena-larionova?

>    Plugins can be referenced cross-namespace without any additional configuration.

Reviewer 2: Missed this - let's go with: 
```suggestion
   Plugins can be referenced across namespaces without any additional configuration.
```

   field `plugin` is set to the name of the `KongPluginInstallation` resource.

   ```yaml
   echo '
   apiVersion: configuration.konghq.com/v1
   kind: KongPlugin
   metadata:
     name: myheader
   plugin: custom-plugin-myheader
   config:
     header_value: my-first-plugin
   ---
   apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
   kind: HTTPRoute
   metadata:
     name: httproute-echo
     namespace: default
     annotations:
       konghq.com/strip-path: "true"
       konghq.com/plugins: myheader
   spec:
     parentRefs:
       - name: kong
     rules:
       - matches:
           - path:
               type: PathPrefix
               value: /echo
         backendRefs:
           - name: echo
             kind: Service
             port: 80
   ' | kubectl apply -f -
   ```

   The `HTTPRoute` above routes requests to the `echo` service and applies the plugin to responses.

6. Ensure that everything is up and running and make a request to the service:

   To call the API, fetch the PROXY_IP for the Gateway:

   ```bash
   export PROXY_IP=$(kubectl get gateway kong -o jsonpath='{.status.addresses[0].value}')
   ```

>    Finally, make a `curl` request to the service:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Make a `curl` request to the service:
```

   ```bash
   curl -I $PROXY_IP/echo
   ```

   The response should include the custom header set by the plugin:

   ```txt
   HTTP/1.1 200 OK
   Content-Type: text/plain; charset=utf-8
   Content-Length: 61
   Connection: keep-alive
   Date: Wed, 09 Oct 2024 20:21:23 GMT
   Server: kong/3.8.0.0-enterprise-edition
   myheader: my-first-plugin
   X-Kong-Upstream-Latency: 3
   X-Kong-Proxy-Latency: 0
   Via: 1.1 kong/3.8.0.0-enterprise-edition
   X-Kong-Request-Id: 6eec26150170fe3547bc1a4a20e93d74
   ```

## Troubleshooting

> Everything needed to debug problematic `KongPluginInstallation` can be found in the `status` of the respective resource.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Everything needed to debug problematic `KongPluginInstallation`s can be found in the `status` of the respective resource.
```

> For instance, if the plugin referenced in the `GatewayConfiguration` does not exist, by examining the status of the `Gateway` resource:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For instance, if the plugin referenced in the `GatewayConfiguration` does not exist, examine the status of the `Gateway` resource:
```

```bash
kubectl get gateway -o jsonpath-as-json='{.items[*].status.conditions}'
```

> you can learn:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Pay attention to the status of the resources:
```

```json
[
    [
        {
            "lastTransitionTime": "2024-10-10T15:58:52Z",
            "message": "All listeners are accepted.",
            "observedGeneration": 1,
            "reason": "Accepted",
            "status": "True",
            "type": "Accepted"
        },
        {
            "lastTransitionTime": "2024-10-10T15:58:52Z",
            "message": "There are other conditions that are not yet ready",
            "observedGeneration": 1,
            "reason": "Pending",
            "status": "False",
            "type": "Programmed"
        },
        {
            "lastTransitionTime": "2024-10-10T15:58:52Z",
            "message": "Waiting for the resource to become ready",
            "observedGeneration": 1,
            "reason": "WaitingToBecomeReady",
            "status": "False",
            "type": "DataPlaneReady"
        },
        {
            "lastTransitionTime": "2024-10-10T15:58:52Z",
            "message": "Resource has been created",
            "observedGeneration": 1,
            "reason": "ResourceCreatedOrUpdated",
            "status": "False",
            "type": "ControlPlaneReady"
        }
    ]
]
```

> that `DataPlane` is not ready. So looking at the `DataPlane` status:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this case, the `DataPlane` is not ready. 
You can now look at the `DataPlane`'s status:
```

```bash
kubectl get dataplanes.gateway-operator.konghq.com -o jsonpath-as-json='{.items[*].status.conditions}'
```

> provides more information:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This provides more information about the specific resource:
```

```json
[
    [
        {
            "lastTransitionTime": "2024-10-10T15:58:54Z",
            "message": "referenced KongPluginInstallation default/additional-custom-plugin-4 not found",
            "observedGeneration": 1,
            "reason": "ReferencedResourcesNotAvailable",
            "status": "False",
            "type": "Ready"
        }
    ]
]
```

> that `KongPluginInstallation` in the namespace `default` with the name `additional-custom-plugin-4` is not found.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this case, you can see that `KongPluginInstallation` in the namespace `default` with the name `additional-custom-plugin-4` is not found.
```

Following the approach described above, you can troubleshoot any issues related to the `KongPluginInstallation` resource.

> Sometimes troubleshooting may lead to examining the `status` field of the `KongPluginInstallation` resource itself (e.g. referencing not existing image or an image that doesn't contain a valid plugin).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sometimes troubleshooting may lead to examining the `status` field of the `KongPluginInstallation` resource itself (for example, referencing a non-existent image or an image that doesn't contain a valid plugin).
```
